I had a question about certainty, wisdom, and the question is, how can we distinguish, like
very clearly distinguish, the difference between certainty, wisdom, which teaching is so important
in meditation, so we don't have doubts and hesitations come up in our meditation and
lead us off track. So how to clearly distinguish between having certainty, wisdom, and having
a really stubborn opinion that's so, that's very certain of itself, and then I guess another
way to put it is, if you would talk a little bit about valid cognition, like how to know
it's really valid cognition.
I mean, certain wisdom is definitely very important, but certain wisdom is, for example, for
example, certain wisdom of the relative truth, and certain wisdom of the absolute truth, and
certain wisdom of the relative truth is exactly as it is, you see, with
what things are in the world, with your common sense, with your understanding, exactly as you see,
then we don't have to be doubt.
So what the great master, Shanta Ratnath said in his teaching, what means the relative truth,
because the relative truth also has two relative truths, one is called perfect relative truth and
wrong relative truths, wrong relative truths, both are relative truths, but now we're talking of
the
part and relative truth. Part and relative truth is what the great master Shanta Ratnath said, that
everyone sees the same thing, from the scholar to the just unstarted person, everyone's ugly, the
same thing, the same thing, and every, also as you see things as it is also performing that item,
so whatever that is, performing
exactly as your truth. So for example, I have used a roughly example, so if you see the prior, when
you see the prior, scholars see the prior, it's prior, very educated, all that stuff, such as
Einstein, Einstein, when you see the prior, he will say also it's prior, and I understand the
person that living in small young ones, also when you see, it's prior, it's prior, so there's no
really disagreement between that prior.
So that is called, commonly perceived by everyone, it's a common perceived. And then, what does it
say? And then it performs the activities, that is the second call of the certainty wisdom, that
prior, as everyone says the prior, but it does that activity of the prior, it's burning, heat, heat
, warmth, it has, or you don't have that, if it's not, then that prior, even everyone says the prior
is not.
No, it's something different. So, performing the activity, exactly as it is. And then if you ever
get analyzed that, according to the mother or according to the absolute level, then it's empty.
That is known as the part of the very truth, part of the very truth, symbol of the part of the very
truth.
So when you see that, exactly as it is, exactly as it is, and that is called certainty wisdom,
exactly. And then if you kind of doubt about that, you're pulling your own stomach, it's not really
, you're not going any, any pause, you're just going around and around.
So that is certainty wisdom. So that is all in the relative level. Absolute level that, when we're
talking certainty wisdom, is for example, we're looking to the mind. Mind, without going to any
place, mind is nature, it is emptiness.
And that is also, I mean, if you look to everyone, from the educated person to the uneducated
person, if you see, where is mind? I don't think anybody has any answers.
And even there's no answer there, but it's also coming, all this displays, thoughts, and all these
thoughts coming. And then we look to more, more of those, whether it is a display or whether that
mind is something, this is all, again, that's uncomfunded or enthusiastic.
So that, when you have that realization, I think that is really the, the certainty wisdom,
certainty wisdom, and I think that is also as like, valid cognitions too.
And Ripche, could you then say also a little bit about, like, the difference between impure
relative truth and the way noble beings see it, the pure relative truth?
Yeah, that is an impure, impure, I mean, it's a part of the relative truth and the archipelago
relative truth, archipelago relative truth, I think maybe, again, you like, know, is the, that is
like, a reflection moon in the water, is the archipelago example of the archipelago relative truth.
It is the relative truth, it looks like moon, but it's not going to perform the activity as moon,
moon's activities. So this is, and also a picture of the moon, or picture of the eye, whatever, it
looks like that, but it's not going to perform activity.
So it's, those are all category, named as a wrong or the un, un-beneficial relative truth, to
compare with the religious relative truth.
Yes, it's just examples in the philosopher's systems.
Then, this is called pure relative truth and impure relative truth, impure relative truth, nature,
impure relative truth and pure relative truth, nature is the same, there's no difference.
All is illusion. All is despair. All, there's nothing really difference. But however, impure
relative truth is what we see in this.
We see art is art, water as water, fire as fire, wind as wind. And impure relative truth is those,
in light winds, seeing water is not earth. It's like human Buddha.
Pumul Buddha, Sanghyeh jhema, Sasanghyeh jhema, Choh mamak, water is mamaki, meh kul karmu, pai is
kul karmu, long takse dromma, long wind, wind is takse drom, Pumul Buddha of the, of the, Pumul
Buddha of the Amogra Siddhas.
And namkwa ska is bodhye rinsoh, meh geh dakwe chohri, those are the live and see. So this is
relative truth, impure relative truth, I mean that is what really it is, all that see.
That was called pure relative truth. And reality, as I said, whether it's pure or impure, nature is
the same. It's reflection, mon eva, it's not solitude and confident, all that.
>> Thank you, Mr. Chair.
>> Okay, then we'll start with Mr.